# Data-Analytics-on-Financial-Intruments-
Creation of an optimised portfolio of ETFs and weighing between High ESG vs Low ESG on performance 

Executive Summary
With an ever-increasing investor interest on Environmental, Social, Governance (ESG) performance and its impact on risk and returns decisions, this project aims to demonstrate and analyse between two portfolios, each composed of stocks and Exchange Traded Funds (ETFs) of relative high and low ESG scores. We compared three stocks and ETFs from comparable industries and determine whether a high ESG risky portfolio would outperform low ESG risky portfolio. To ensure comparability, we chose the stocks listed on the United States’ major exchanges. First, we looked at a 2-assets optimiser comprising ESG stocks and ETFs, together with a US treasury bond as a risk-free asset. For the 3-assets optimiser, we added the S&P 500 Market Index ETF to the 2-assets optimiser for further portfolio diversification. We then completed the portfolio by pairing these optimal weights with the respective stocks and ETFs and determine the best optimal portfolio for various risk aversion levels of investors. Our research showed us that low ESG risky portfolio still performs better in the short run but with sustainability being the next revolution, we expect the high ESG risky portfolio to generate better returns in the long run. 
1	Introduction
In recent years, Environmental, Social, Governance (ESG) movement has picked up speed and more companies are increasingly ESG aware. It further accelerated due to the worldwide disruptions since the Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic outbreak. The world’s market saw record inflows of ESG funds since 2020 (Figure 1). We wanted to examine if high ESG stocks indeed outperformed low ESG stocks given the increased interest in ESG, the theoretical advantages that comes with being more sustainable and the significant fund inflows during the market turmoil.  We also wanted to examine the impact of COVID-19 on the market performance  as it is touted as a once-in-a-lifetime event.
We referred to Corporate Knights’ 2021 Index of world’s most sustainable corporations and MSCI ESG ratings to shortlist our United States listed stock selection for security allocation. Empirical evidence has shown us that our research should not depend on a single ESG rating as there is a lack of common rating methodology. Hence, we have also included Refinitiv ESG score as a reference. We ensured that the shortlisted companies had consistent results in both ESG ratings, e.g. if it is rated as a “Leader” in MSCI, it should also be in the top percentile in Refinitiv.
	Our passive investment strategy, with a time horizon of five years, is based on the outlook of a recovering economy post pandemic where Industry 4.0 is vitalising the way we operate. To ensure diversification, Exchange-Traded Funds (ETF) are included. A Volatility Index (VIX) ETF is also included in the portfolio to hedge against the market (i.e. profit from increases in the expected volatility of the S&P 500, as it has historically been negatively correlated to S&P 500 returns). 

2	Literature Review
The project aims to analyse the performance of a passive investment strategy catered to a young risk averse investor who recently entered the workforce. With an intended time-horizon of five years and expectation for growth and returns, the selected financial instrument is common stocks of firms. Although for diversification, a three-fund portfolio that includes stocks and bonds via index funds is recommended. However, due to the historic lows of United States (US) 10-year Treasury Inflation-Protected Security (TIPS) interest rate (Figure 2) which has been negative since April 2020, capital would have more opportunity to grow in the stock markets. The investor will lose money by investing in 10-year government bonds, after accounting for inflation, if held to maturity.  
On security selection, we identified the following industries to have future growth potential and resilient performance in this period of slow economic recovery. Due to the accelerated adoption of Industry 4.0 during the pandemic, this has led to an increase in cybersecurity risks and hence the demand for cybersecurity solutions (Figure 3). The industry is expected to grow at a steady rate of approximately 6.78% for software and information technology (IT) services at 12.1% over the next five years (Figure 3.1). It has also contributed to the market for cloud-based infrastructure (Figure 4). We have selected two companies that fall within different broad categories of MSCI, Cisco Systems, Inc. (Cisco) and Fortinet, Inc. (Fortinet). Cisco offers enterprise network security and cloud services while Fortinet provides network security solutions. MSCI had rated Cisco as AA (Figure 5) (i.e. Leader category) and Fortinet as BBB (Figure 6) (i.e. Average). While the category positioning for each company may not be vastly different, Refinitiv re-affirm their different ESG classification . We plotted their stock performance against two market indices, MSCI World Information and Technology (IT) Index, as they are in the information technology industry, and S&P500 Index (S&P500). Chart considerations has also been made for pre and post COVID-19 as investors’ behaviours were observed to have changed due to this unprecedented event. It is observed that Cisco and Fortinet had been performing better than the market indices pre COVID-19 and continued to perform post COVID-19 with Fortinet having stellar performance (Figure 7). Coupled with the expectations for the future industry performance, these companies’ stocks were chosen to be included in the security allocation analysis.
 As the world shifted majority of their employees to home-based working to slow down the spread of COVID-19, this has fuelled the demand for cybersecurity solutions and cloud-based IT infrastructure (Figure 3 & 4). The market for data centre infrastructure is expected to expand year on year through to 2024 . Gartner forecasted the worldwide IT spending on data centre systems and in 2022 to grow by 5.2% (Figure 8). Currently, there is also a deployment of 5G network across the world adding to the demand for specialised infrastructures. With this positive outlook on this specialised real estate industry, we chose Equinix, Inc. (Equinix) and SBA Communications Corporation (SBA). Both companies specialised in internet connection and wireless infrastructure with Equinix also dedicated to operating data centres . These two companies also have distinct MSCI ESG standing where Equinix is a leader (Figure 9) in the real estate operations whereas SBA is an average (Figure 10) performer. This is further supported by their respective Refinitiv’s ESG scores . It is observed that the pandemic propelled their stock performance to new heights above their strong performance pre-pandemic (Figure 11). This shows the growth potential of these two stocks post-pandemic.
Remote working lifestyle boosted the likes of subscription-based video streaming services such as Netflix owned by Netflix, Inc. (Netflix) and Disney+ operated by The Walt Disney Company (Disney) during the pandemic (Figure 12). There is growth potential in this industry as Netflix is now synonymous with popular original content and is looking to diversify into video gaming . Despite Disney (A) being in the same MSCI ESG “Average” category  as Netflix (BB), they are each at different end of the spectrum. We referred to Refinitiv’s ESG scores and noted that Disney (Figure 13.1) was given a significantly higher score than Netflix (Figure 14.1), affirming our stock selection. They also performed well pre and post pandemic with Netflix picking up momentum in the recent years (Figure 15). 

3	Quantitative Analysis
Diversification is paramount in a passive investment strategy. We have included three ETFs in the portfolio formation. To supplement the industries chosen earlier, energy is required to make the world go round. Hence, we have chosen iShares Global Clean Energy ETF (iShares Clean Energy) to represent the high ESG component (Figure 16) and iShares MSCI China ETF (iShares China) which is the best proxy available in the same ETF series for non-renewable energy and has a lower ESG rating (Figure 17) than its comparison. To hedge our investment strategy, we have included ProShares VIX Mid-Term Futures ETF (VIXM). This ETF does not have a ESG rating and generates an implied volatility of the market which it profits from through hedging. VIXM also helps to reduce portfolio risk as it has historically been negatively correlated to the returns of S&P500 (Figure 19). When volatility is high, stock market performance usually goes down. As an investment, VIXM is meant to protect a portfolio during turbulent times. VIX ETF positions decay over time due to the behaviour of VIX futures curve and its repetitive process. When the current ETFs expire, they will have lesser funds to roll into subsequent futures contracts. 
3.1	Portfolio Formation
An investment strategy requires the formation of an optimal portfolio by the investor. We generally classified a company or ETF with MSCI ESG ratings of either AA or AAA in the high ESG category and all other ratings in the low ESG category (Figure 20). First, we classified the shortlisted selection of company stocks and ETFs into two pools of high and low ESG for comparison (Figure 20.1). VIXM was introduced, in both the high and low ESG portfolios, to hedge against the risk of large adverse movements in stock market. Our project aims to test the hypothesis: high ESG portfolio yields higher returns than low ESG portfolio. The analysis was performed on the period from 1 August 2011 to 31 December 2019. We also assessed for the impact of COVID-19 which occurred from January 2020 till our period end, 31 July 2021.
To perform quantitative analysis on both sets of portfolios, we computed their returns, standard deviation, skewness and kurtosis. We observed that the annual returns (Figure 21) of all the stocks in the selected industries, (i.e. technology, entertainment, real estate and energy), are all higher in the low ESG portfolio except for the real estate industry (i.e. EQIX). Higher returns are rewarded for taking higher risk and the standard deviation results (Figure 21.1) also support this. The standard deviation is higher for all stocks in the low ESG portfolio except for the real estate stock. 
Skewness is another measure of assessing the distribution of returns and is essential for investors who invest in midterm, like our investor persona. They need to look at extreme returns because the law of averaging sets in only for long-term investing. As stock returns do not follow a normal distribution, it is more meaningful to assess returns from skewness instead of standard deviation. Apart from the high ESG stocks in the Entertainment and Energy industry (i.e. DIS, ICLN), the other stocks, both high ESG and low ESG, are positively skewed (Figure 21.2). This means these stocks have returns that generate small losses frequently but can be offset against the few large gains and this is preferred for investing. Whereas, DIS and ICLN are negatively skewed which means there is a higher frequency of extreme negative returns. However, their magnitudes are not large and can be offset by the other stocks within the risky portfolio. 
Kurtosis indicates if volatility risk is concentrated or spread evenly through the distribution of returns. It measures the “fatness” of both tails of the distribution. Investors are more concerned with the lower tail and they want to manage their exposure to extreme negative returns. A large kurtosis value means a higher investment risk as there is higher probabilities of extreme large and small returns. Only VIXM has a high kurtosis coefficient (Figure 21.3) with the remaining below 1 or negative values. The distribution for VIXM is too peaked and EQIX too flat.
To assess if our selection of high ESG and low ESG portfolios are sufficiently diversified, we computed their respective correlation matrices . Correlation indicates the strength of the diversification. When the value is less than 1, there is some form of diversification within the portfolio. For high ESG portfolio, the highest correlation coefficient is 0.4762 between DIS and ICLN and VIXM is negatively correlated to the whole portfolio, providing "insurance" to our portfolio (Figure 22). The highest correlation coefficient in our low ESG portfolio is 0.3599 between SBAC and MCHI and VIXM is also negatively correlated all the stocks within the portfolio (Figure 22.1). This means that both our portfolios can reduce unsystematic risk significantly. 
3.2	Portfolio Optimisation
Markowitz portfolio optimisation model is applied to both sets of risky portfolio to determine the different available risk-return opportunities. This will be the minimum variance frontier which gives the lowest possible variance for a given portfolio’s expected return. The efficient frontier is, indicated from the global minimum variance portfolio and upward, gives the best risk-return combinations. From the efficient frontier, the minimum variance portfolio and the optimal risky portfolio can be identified. The optimal risky portfolio is the portfolio with the highest Sharpe ratio. It gives the highest excess return per unit of risk taken. While the minimum variance portfolio gives the investor the lowest portfolio risk. All investors will pick the same optimal risky portfolio with the only variation in the proportion of weight assigned to this risky portfolio, which is dependent on the investor’s risk aversion level. An investor with a higher risk aversion would place less weight in the optimal risky portfolio and more in the risk-free asset.
3.2.1	Minimum Variance and Optimal portfolio
We computed the minimum variance portfolio and optimal portfolio for both high ESG portfolio (Figure 23) and low ESG portfolio (Figure 23.1). The portfolio’s expected return, standard deviation and Sharpe ratio are computed. The respective optimal weights of the stocks included in each portfolio are also computed. The optimal weights hold true regardless of the risk appetite of the investor as these portfolios are on the efficient frontier. Low ESG optimal portfolio gives a higher return than high ESG portfolio but it also riskier (Figure 23.2). The minimum variance frontier is also plotted for both high ESG portfolio (Figure 24) and low ESG portfolio (Figure 24.1) with global minimum variance and maximum Sharpe ratio portfolios specifically plotted on the efficient frontier.
3.2.2	Risk aversion
	To determine the best complete portfolio compositions for investors, we must understand the risk aversion of an investor. Different investors have different risk aversion levels. It is relative and specific to an individual. More risk averse investors would prefer to invest more in risk-free asset. They are less willing to accept greater levels of risk in exchange for higher returns. We performed a sensitivity analysis using the different degree of risk aversion coefficients (A). The higher the “A”, the more risk averse is an investor. The respective “A”s will determine the optimal weights to invest in the risk-free and optimal risky portfolio. For the purposes of this project, we have categorised the risk aversion into three levels with arbitrary numbers, low (i.e. A = 6), medium (i.e. A = 8) and high (i.e. A = 10).
3.2.3	2-Assets Portfolio Optimisation
	A 2-assets portfolio optimiser is a complete portfolio that consist of the optimal risky portfolio and risk-free asset. We used the 10-year US Treasury bond as our risk-free asset. The risk-free rate is the mean of the 10-year US Treasury bond rate for the period 1 August 2011 to 31 December 2019 amounting to 2.25%. We performed the 2-assets portfolio optimisation for both high ESG (Figure 25) and low ESG (Figure 25.1) portfolios respectively. The optimal weight (i.e. y*) of the optimal risky portfolio in the complete portfolio will give the investor the maximum utility of the complete portfolio. A portfolio is attractive when it increases with expected return and decreases with risk. A more risk averse investor would have a lower y*. 
We observed that as the risk aversion level increases from 6 to 10, the optimal weight in risky portfolio decreases as the investor would seek more guaranteed returns from the risk-free asset over volatility risk. The opposite holds true for the risk-seeking investors who would want to maximise returns. From our testing, due to the relatively low risk-free rate of 2.25%, any risk aversion coefficient lesser than 6 will result in an allocation that is highly skewed towards the risky portfolio. There were scenarios where no weight was being assigned to the risk-free asset as this would reduce the investor’s utility, if included.
The results showed that the complete portfolio with low ESG optimal risky portfolio has the highest Sharpe ratio for all three risk aversion levels compared to complete portfolio with high ESG optimal risky portfolio. For the same risk aversion level, the low ESG portfolio also outperformed the high ESG portfolio in the maximum utility score. This is in line with the observation in Figure 23.2. As our project’s investor persona has medium risk aversion level, he would be selecting the complete portfolio with low ESG stocks. He would invest 71.96% in  the optimal risky portfolio and 28.04% in risk-free assets (Figure 25.1). His selected portfolio is also the best portfolio among the low ESG complete portfolio as it has the highest Sharpe ratio of 1.1905 (Figure 25.1).
3.3	Portfolio Formation with Market Index
	To perform a 3-assets portfolio optimisation, we included the market portfolio into our risky portfolio. We used S&P500 index (SPY) as our market portfolio proxy. The inclusion of the market index generated another set of portfolio statistics (i.e. beta and correlation)  and we expect a further reduction in unsystematic risk.
The annual returns of SPY for 1 August 2011 to 31 December 2019 is 13.95% (Figure 26) and its standard deviation is 14.38%. It has positive skewness of 0.1799 (Figure 26.2) and a negative kurtosis of -0.9922 (Figure 26.3). We observed that SPY performs moderately in both high ESG and low ESG portfolio. It is also the least risky, with the smallest standard deviation in both ESG portfolios. The distribution of SPY returns is flat and positively skewed.
With the inclusion of SPY in the high ESG portfolio, the individual stocks are highly correlated to the market index as it is likely these stocks are part of SPY. Though it is highly correlated, there is still some form of diversification in high ESG portfolio as the correlation to SPY are less than 1 respectively. On the other hand, the individual stocks in the low ESG portfolio, are less correlated to SPY. There is a better diversification of stocks in low ESG portfolio compared to high ESG portfolio when the market index is included. In line with Figure 19, VIXM is almost a “perfect” hedge to SPY with a correlation of -0.8007.
	  Beta measures the systematic risk of an individual stock or a portfolio compared to the market. It indicates the sensitivity of the individual stock’s return to the market return. SPY has a beta equal to “1”,  as there is no unsystematic risk, only market risk exists. 
In the high ESG portfolio, CSCO and ICLN are aggressive stocks (i.e. beta > 1) (Figure 27). They are very sensitive to market swings and hence more volatile. Hence, including this stock in the portfolio will increase the portfolio risk but also increase the portfolio’s expected return. DIS and EQIX are defensive stocks (i.e. beta < 1) (Figure 27) and less sensitive to the market movements. VIXM has a negative beta as it is negatively correlated to SPY (Figure 27). Whereas most of the individual stocks in the low ESG portfolio are aggressive stocks except for SBAC (Figure 27.1).
3.3.1	Minimum Variance and Optimal portfolio with Market portfolio
With the inclusion of SPY in the respective risky portfolios, the minimum variance portfolio and optimal portfolio results will differ from the portfolios identified in Section 3.2.1. The optimal portfolio with low ESG stocks performs better than the portfolio with high ESG stocks as it gives better returns (Figure 28.2). By taking 1.4% more in risk, the investor can receive a 3.53% increase in returns (Figure 28.2). We also plotted the minimum variance frontier with the global minimum variance portfolio and optimal portfolio for both high ESG portfolio (Figure 29) and low ESG portfolio (Figure 29.1).
We also compared the inclusion effect of SPY on the optimal portfolio for high ESG (Figure 30) and low ESG (Figure 30.1) respective. SPY reduces the overall portfolio risk, correspondingly the optimal portfolio’s expected return is also decreases. For a medium risk averse investor, they will be attracted to invest in a portfolio of lesser risk instead of earning the slightly higher returns . 
3.3.2	3-Assets Portfolio Optimisation
The difference between a 2-assets portfolio and a 3-assets portfolio optimisation is the inclusion of a market index in the optimal risky portfolio. The complete portfolio still consists of the optimal risky portfolio and risk-free asset. We used the same risk-free rate in Section 3.2.3 (i.e. 2.25%) in our analysis. 
 Similar to the results observed in 2-assets optimisation Section 3.2.3, the complete portfolio that includes optimal low ESG risky portfolio (Figure 31.1) performed better than the portfolio with high ESG stocks (Figure 31), across all the different levels of risk aversion, as it gave higher Sharpe ratio. At each risk aversion level, the complete portfolio with low ESG stocks also gives a higher maximum utility score than the portfolio with high ESG stocks. We also observed that when the risk aversion level is low (i.e. investor loves risk) a full weight is assigned to the optimal risky portfolio which included SPY and none to risk-free asset. The inclusion of a risk-free asset would decrease their utility score as the risk premium of the optimal risky portfolio is significantly higher at 24.22% (Figure 28.1) than risk-free rate.
3.4	Portfolio Selection
	In Section 3.2.3, we concluded that the complete portfolio consisting of the optimal risky portfolio with low ESG stocks performed better than the portfolio with high ESG stocks. We decided to include the market portfolio in Section 3.3.1 and noted that the optimal risky portfolio’s risk is reduced further by 2.09% to 18.58% (Figure 30.1). Hence, we proceeded to form a complete portfolio with the optimal risky portfolio that includes low ESG stocks and market index for our project’s investor persona, who has a medium risk aversion level (A=8). This complete portfolio gives an expected return is 19.72% with a maximum utility of 0.1099 (Figure 31.1). The weights of the individual stocks in the complete portfolio are computed in Figure 33 and the overall complete portfolio’s beta in Figure 33.1.
The market index is preferred to be included in the optimal risky portfolio as it has significantly lower standard deviation compared to the other individual stocks (Figure 26.1). Hence, achieving our objective of having a well-diversified portfolio. We also noted that there is a higher weightage assigned to the optimal risky portfolio, yet giving an overall lower standard deviation compared to the complete portfolio without SPY (Figure 32) at a medium risk aversion level. However, this could be beneficial in the next few years where the 10-year US Treasury bond rate is expected to decrease due to the Federal Reserve’s willingness to tighten the monetary policy . With a higher weight assigned to the optimal risk portfolio, this increases the probability of earning excess returns from the selected stocks and market index in the future.
3.5	Impact of COVID-19
	COVID-19 is considered a once-in-a-lifetime event and there have been a few research papers on the relationship between ESG stocks (i.e. high ESG stocks) and market crashes such as COVID-19. However, there is no consensus on this relationship. Murata & Hamori (2021) stated that ESG disclosures is not statistically significant for the US market to lower risk of future stock price crash. Demers et al. (2021) also drew similar conclusion where ESG did not offer positive explanatory power for returns during the COVID-19 crisis. The other side of the argument is that high corporate social responsibility rated firms are associated with better stock performance during times of crisis as studied by Lins et al. (2017). Engelhardt et al. (2021) also observed that high ESG rated companies are associated with higher abnormal returns and lower stock volatility but is more prevalent for European firms. Hence, we performed our own analysis to determine the impact of COVID-19 on our portfolio.
	We updated our data by extending the duration from period ended 31 December 2019 to 31 July 2021. The 10-year US Treasury bond rate was also re-computed with the extended period, at a risk-free rate of 2.06%.
We re-performed quantitative analysis as the extended period generated a new set of statistics . We noted that with the inclusion of COVID-19 period (i.e. from January 2020 to 31 July 2021), the conclusion to invest in a complete portfolio where the optimal risky portfolio consist of low ESG stocks with market portfolio still holds true (Figure 37.2). However, we focused our analysis on how COVID-19 has impacted our complete portfolio that consists of the optimal risky portfolio of low ESG stocks with market index.  
	We observed that for a medium risk averse investor investing the complete portfolio in the post COVID-19 period gave him a slight increase in expected return of 0.24% but he had to bear more risk of 0.18% (Figure 38). Therefore, we concluded that COVID-19 did not impact our portfolio returns significantly. Our project results showed us that high ESG stocks did not give us high returns. On the contrary, it is the low ESG stocks that gave us better returns. 
We also performed a quick comparison between the performance of the high ESG portfolio pre and post COVID-19. During the pre COVID-19, the complete portfolio with high ESG stocks without market index had a better performance than the portfolio with market index. Using this basis, we checked its performance post COVID-19 for the 2-assets optimiser and noted that much better pre COVID-19. 	

4	Limitations
	The project used arbitrary numbers to indicate the different risk aversion levels. Ideally, an investor's level of risk aversion should be determined in a more structured manner, e.g. using a risk assessment questionnaire. Risk aversion is traditionally based on risk tolerance, risk capacity and necessity of risk to achieve financial goals. It also includes other objectives (i.e. investment time horizon, investor’s age and financial ability) and subjective (i.e. investor’s behaviour to various situations) measures. A traditional risk aversion scoring system is from a one-dimensional approach of a simple summation. A more holistic way to compute a risk aversion score is from a two-dimensional approach where it scores each traditional metric on a two-axis scale where it considers the interaction of each metric to each other (Figure 39). However, we can at best approximate the risk aversion level as sometimes even the investor himself does not know how he will react to an unknown situation.
	Another limitation is the availability of quality ESG data. Doyle (2018) observed that only larger companies tend to obtain higher ESG scores because they have the resources to meet the necessary ESG disclosure requirements. The ratings are also impacted by the geography of the company’s business operation. If they are operating in a developing country, ESG information might be limited and inaccurate. There is also criticism that ESG data assessed by rating agencies are mostly self-report and self-assessed. There is currently no industry standard for auditing ESG disclosures and among the various rating agencies there is also no consensus on a standard rating system. Each rating agency may focus on different aspects of ESG when rating a company.

5	Conclusion
	Our research has shown that high ESG stocks do not yield higher returns than low ESG stocks, surprisingly the converse is true. This may be because the popularity of ESG only started in the late 2010s. Currently, the market is still understanding the effects of ESG disclosures and good ESG ratings. In the weak form efficient market, the stock prices have yet to fully reflect such information. Therefore, an investor can still earn higher returns from low ESG stocks in the next few years. However, when the market understands ESG better and with mega trends such as digitalisation and sustainability revolution occurring, we foresee that high ESG stocks will perform better in the long run. Hence, the investor needs to position himself to benefit from these trends and earn excess returns. With the risk-free rate expected to decrease further, the investor should also stay overweighted in equities to generate higher returns.
 
